Front page

Minister Karmen Joller in Luxembourg: Europe needs a united front against…

Minister Karmen Joller in Luxembourg: Europe needs a united front against…

Europe must act more jointly and in a more coordinated way to stop the spread of health-related misinformation, said Estonia’s Minister of Social Affairs, Karmen Joller, today at the meeting of EU health ministers in Luxembourg.

Read more

New €12 million innovation programme unveiled at Welfare Technology Festival in…

New €12 million innovation programme unveiled at Welfare Technology Festival in…

At Estonia's first-ever Welfare Technology Festival last week, a new €12 million innovation programme was announced, aimed at supporting independent living for older adults and people with disabilities through technology-driven solutions.

Read more

Karmen Joller to the Ukrainian Minister of Health: Estonia has much to learn…

Karmen Joller to the Ukrainian Minister of Health: Estonia has much to learn…

Estonian Minister of Social Affairs Karmen Joller and Ukrainian Minister of Health Viktor Liashko today signed the next stage of a health cooperation agreement. The aim of the agreement is to reinforce health collaboration, support Ukraine’s healthcare system recovery, and leverage the wartime…

Read more



Legal Perspective: We Can Cope, but Let the Next Pandemic Wait a Bit

COVID-19 has not been an internationally concerning public health emergency for seven months. In everyday language and life, we knew it as the coronavirus pandemic. The pandemic brought about a safety belt of societal restrictions to protect the healthcare system and public health, especially the elderly. At that time, our knowledge about the virus and its spread was scarce. The virus was constantly changing, and hospitals and the medical system globally were under immense pressure. The restrictions ultimately led to legal disputes.

Read more!

Bring us your Ideas!

e-Consultation

You can follow drafts currently in progress and, if you wish, you can also comment or take part in a public consultation.

Submit ideas

You have the opportunity to bring us your ideas for making Estonia better!

Stay tuned!

To subscribe to press information or industry newsletters:

Subscribe to newsletters

Ministry of Social Affairs

Suur-Ameerika 1, 10122 Tallinn

+372 626 9301

[email protected]

Open Mon -Thu 8.30-17.15 and Fri 8.30-16.00

Terms of use Privacy Policy Accessibility Help Cookies Help

Liitu uudiskirjaga

Soovite saada lehel sm.ee avaldatavaid uudiseid ja teateid e-postiga? Märkige, milliseid teated soovite ning kirjutage lahtritesse oma e-posti aadress. Teile saadetakse seejärel tellimuse kinnitamiseks e-kiri koos juhistega, kuidas saate oma tellimust hiljem soovi korral muuta või lõpetada.